# Data games - Instructor notes

A workshop comprised of four games, each followed by a mini-lecture that
explains the key concept of data analysis illustrated by the game.

## Farm race game (Normal distribution)

### What is it?

Activity to demonstrate where the normal distribution comes from. Also revises
basic histogram plotting and the idea of a distribution.

### What do they do?

Students form groups by proximity / breakout rooms. Each size / makeup of
groups doesn't matter, but no more than eight groups, and they should be of
roughly equal size.

Each student has a laptop, on which they have gone to
[rolladie.net](https://rolladie.net) , set it up for rolling 4 six-sided
dice. They also go to [menti.com](https://www.menti.com) and enter the code
provided.

The class leader shows the [farm race board](data-games.odp), and the
mentimeter poll results - [example layout](race-poll.png). Groups pick their
animal in turn. When all on starting line, TA picks a student from each group
in turn to roll dice, report score, and answer menti poll. Class leader moves
corresponding animal that distance in cm (see rule).

First team over the line wins! There should be some kind of prize.

### What data do we end up with?

Average throw is 4 * 3.5 = 14, so the average group will finish in 8
throws. With 6 groups, the likelihood is one will win more quickly, roughly 7
on average I think. So the group will end up with around 40 tally marks on the
sheet, which should be just about enough to show a normal-like
distribution. We'll use this data in the mini-tutorial below.

### End-of-exercise mini-lecture

Gather the groups together. Ask students whether any one number on a
single fair dice is more likely than any other (it isn't). Show them a
likely tally chart for a single dice on this basis. Ask them to
compare this with the tally chart for their horse race scores. How are
they different? Why are they different?  (They're different because
there's only one way to get 24 or 4, but a lot of different ways to
get middling sums). Make the point that when any number is the sum (or
mean) of a bunch of different numbers, the sum will have approximately
this distribution --- *whatever the distribution of the individual
scores*. This is why a lot of data relating to people has a normal
distribution. For example, IQ scores are made up of scores on a lot of
different tests, and the resulting average is normally distributed (in
the non-brain-damaged population).

## Exam bingo (Sampling)

### What is it?

Practical exercise to demonstrate Law of Small Numbers (Tversky & Kahenman) -
in other words, the tendency to draw strong conclusions on the basis of
insufficient data.

### What do they do?

Students do this game individually. They go to
[menti.com](https://www.menti.com) and enter the code provided.

The class leader shows the [exam bingo board](data-games.odp).  The class
leader starts revealing exam scores, one at a time, for the Red group, and the
Blue group, in turn. Sample from the [distribution
spreadsheet](exam-score-sheet.ods) - which the student should not see - without
replacement.

As soon as students are sure they know whether Reds or Blues are better on
average, they vote. Keep going until everyone votes. TA views the mentimeter
poll results - [example layout](bingo-poll.png) - **but does not share these
results with students until the end of the game**. TA also keeps a record of
how many people in total have voted at the end of each reveal of a score.

### End-of-activity mini-lecture

First, it'll be instructive to see the level of agreement about which is the
best - Reds or Blues?

Second, reveal how many samples people took before answering (the data collated
by the TA).

Ask how many samples they think they'd need to be fairly sure which group was
better. The answer for this obviously depends on the level of certainty
required, but standard power calculations indicate 25 samples per group (so 50
pieces of data) for 80% power at an alpha of .05 for the mean difference and
standard deviation of these cards. 80% power is really the minimum that is
acceptable in modern psychology.

Take home message: big samples are important.

### What's the distribution?

Red pot contains numbers sampled from a normal distribution, mean 62,
sd 10; blue pot is mean 70, sd 10.  

Construction of the card decks was assisted by an R script, which you
can find on this site's github repository at `src/sample-pots.R`. A
set of 48 numbers for each group generated by this script, suitable
for making your own cards, can be found [here](pots.csv).

