# Distributions and samples - Instructor notes

## Farm race game (Normal distribution)

### What is it?

Activity to demonstrate where the normal distribution comes from. Also
teaches/revises basic histogram plotting and the idea of a
distribution.

### What do they do?

Students get into groups of six. Each group has four dice, six farm
animal models, a [sheet](race-dist.pdf) on which to produce a
histogram, a start and end marker placed 1m apart, and a 30cm rule.

On their turn, they throw the dice, add them up, move their horse that
many centimetres, and make a tally mark on the histogram chart. First
to the end wins!

### What data do we end up with?

Average throw is 4 * 3.5 = 14, so the average player will finish in 8
throws. With 6 players, the likelihood is one will win more quickly,
roughly 6 on average I think. So the group will end up with around 50
tally marks on the sheet, which should be enough to show a normal-like
distribution. We'll use this data in the mini-tutorial below.

### End-of-exercise mini-tutorial

Gather the groups together. Ask students whether any one number on a
single fair dice is more likely than any other (it isn't). Show them a
likely tally chart for a single dice on this basis. Ask them to
compare this with the tally chart for their horse race scores. How are
they different? Why are they different?  (They're different because
there's only one way to get 24 or 4, but a lot of different ways to
get middling sums). Make the point that when any number is the sum (or
mean) of a bunch of different numbers, the sum will have approximately
this distribution --- *whatever the distribution of the individual
scores*. This is why a lot of data relating to people has a normal
distribution. For example, IQ scores are made up of scores on a lot of
different tests, and the resulting average is normally distributed (in
the non-brain-damaged population).

## Exam bingo (Sampling)

### What is it?

Practical exercise to demonstrate Law of
Small Numbers (Tversky & Kahenman) - in other words, the tendency to
draw strong conclusions on the basis of insufficient data.

### What do they do?

Get into groups of six, and then divide each into two groups of
three. One group is the 'reds', and one group is the 'blues', and they
each get a stack of cards of the corresponding colour. The stacks
contain (invented) percentage test scores for members of their group.

On the count of three, each team pulls out one score. The team with
the higher score is the winner. Pass the card decks to the right and go
again. When the group is confident they know which colour has the
higher scores on average, they stop, recording the number of goes they
had before stopping.

Each group is then asked which colour is smarter, and how many goes
they took to reach this decision. They record this on their [exam
bingo card](exam-bingo-card.pdf).

### End-of-activity mini-tutorial

First, it'll be instructive to see if every student group agrees (pots
have same population characteristic between groups, but with small
samples different groups will probably give different answers).

Second, ask how many samples each group took. Ask how many samples
they think they'd need to be fairly sure which group was better. The
answer for this obviously depends on the level of certainty required,
but standard power calculations indicate 25 samples per group for 80%
power at an alpha of .05 for the mean difference and standard
deviation of these cards. 80% power is really the minimum that is
acceptable in modern psychology.

Take home message: big samples are important.

### What's in the card decks?

Red pot contains numbers sampled from a normal distribution, mean 62,
sd 10; blue pot is mean 70, sd 10.  To achieve 80% power at an alpha
of .05 requires a sample size of 25 per group. Cards should all be
individually coloured red or blue, to facilitate re-filling pots at
the end of the session.

Construction of the card decks was assisted by an R script, which you
can find on this site's github repository at `src/sample-pots.R`. A
set of 48 numbers for each group generated by this script, suitable
for making your own cards, can be found [here](pots.csv).

