docs/EvaluatingExperimentsInstructorInteract.md, before:

# Evaluating experiments: Instructor notes

_Interactive version_

| time | activity |
| ---- | -------- |
| 0:00 | session start |
| 0:05 | Rstudio reminder, recap purpose of lectures, last lecture |
| 0:07 | Poll of Lecture 1 ... did it replicate? |
| 0:17 | topic intro - designing experiments. housekeeping | 
| 0:19 | spurious correlations, examples | 
| 0:25 | depression and memory | 
| 0:31 | longitudinal data, night lights | 
| 0:37 | Correlation does not imply .. |
| 0:39 | Spell out session structure from here |
| 0:40 | The experimental method | 
| 0:42 | Testing a treatment for depression | 
| 0:45 | Pre-existing differences | 
| 0:47 | Detection | 
| 0:48 | Prevention | 
| 0:54 | Our therapy experiment | 
| 0:56 | INTERMISSION |
| 1:06 | Attrition | 
| 1:16 | Placebo effect |
| 1:21 | Placebo effect in psychological therapy | 
| 1:28 | Data analysis | 
| 1:32 | Objective measures immune? | 
| 1:36 | Blind testing | 
| 1:39 | Feynmann, preregistration | 
| 1:43 | Difference versus no difference designs | 
| 1:47 | Better alternatives 1 | 
| 1:49 | Better alternatives 2 | 
| 1:51 | Evaluating an experiment - set up activity (this individual activity reports back in Week 3) |
| 1:56 | Teach end |
| 2:00 | Session end |

Commit message:

Add notes for updates next year

docs/EvaluatingExperimentsInstructorInteract.md, after:

# Evaluating experiments: Instructor notes

_Interactive version_

The timings below are from the 2020 session, which was run entirely on Zoom. Some thoughts/reflections on the 2021 session, which was blended (2/3rds students in lecture hall, 1/3rd on Zoom)

## Reflections on 2021 session

This is quite an information-heavy session, with a lot of different things to tell the students and them putting this knowledge to work only happens in the homework. I think it might be worth breaking it up with a half-way Mentimeter poll, although it'd have to be quick as time is limited.

There's also some tidying to do from cuts I made in 2020. In particular, the discussion of single-blind testing largely comes from the consideration of participant effects, which got cut and makes the double-blind description odd (it's odd anyway, as why is single participants? Conventional, but doesn't make a lot of sense). Rejig this slide to talk about experimenter-blind testing, drop single-blind?

More clearly split the later material into sub-sections:

1. Attrition

2. Participant Effects: Placebo effect as a type of Participant Effect (refer students to notes for other types, with a slide)

3. Experimenter effects - of which response coding and analysis choices are two examples, and blind and pre-reg as possible solutions. 

4. Good and bad hypotheses - with diff/no-diff, directional, and strong inference as examples. 

## Timings

| time | activity |
| ---- | -------- |
| 0:00 | session start |
| 0:05 | Rstudio reminder, recap purpose of lectures, last lecture |
| 0:07 | Poll of Lecture 1 ... did it replicate? |
| 0:17 | topic intro - designing experiments. housekeeping | 
| 0:19 | spurious correlations, examples | 
| 0:25 | depression and memory | 
| 0:31 | longitudinal data, night lights | 
| 0:37 | Correlation does not imply .. |
| 0:39 | Spell out session structure from here |
| 0:40 | The experimental method | 
| 0:42 | Testing a treatment for depression | 
| 0:45 | Pre-existing differences | 
| 0:47 | Detection | 
| 0:48 | Prevention | 
| 0:54 | Our therapy experiment | 
| 0:56 | INTERMISSION |
| 1:06 | Attrition | 
| 1:16 | Placebo effect |
| 1:21 | Placebo effect in psychological therapy | 
| 1:28 | Data analysis | 
| 1:32 | Objective measures immune? | 
| 1:36 | Blind testing | 
| 1:39 | Feynmann, preregistration | 
| 1:43 | Difference versus no difference designs | 
| 1:47 | Better alternatives 1 | 
| 1:49 | Better alternatives 2 | 
| 1:51 | Evaluating an experiment - set up activity (this individual activity reports back in Week 3) |
| 1:56 | Teach end |
| 2:00 | Session end |
