docs/EvaluatingArgumentsInteractNotes.md, before:

# Evaluating arguments
_Andy J. Wills_

This lecture contained two sections, each aimed at improving your ability to
evaluate arguments - both your own, and other people's.  In the first part of
the lecture, I considered weak arguments - how to identify them and hence
avoid being taken in by them. In the second part, I demonstrated a systematic
method for evaluating arguments.

## Weak arguments

Weak arguments are those that do not support the arguer's conclusion (or do so
only very weakly). Weak arguments are prevalent in general society, and even in
science, because they have the _appearance_ of being good arguments. I'm
telling you about weak arguments so you can detect and reject them. Do not be
tempted by the _dark side_ of weak arguments! They are very powerful, as they
can often be used to win arguments without having to go to the bother of
considering the evidence.

Across several slides, I summarise some of the more common weak arguments. The
examples on the slides start light hearted and clear, but the later examples
indicate that serious issues are at stake here.

As an exercise, see if you can come up with your own examples of the
weak arguments discussed in the lectures. 

## How to evaluate an argument

Evaluating arguments is at the heart of all good scientific writing and is
central to doing well in all essays and reports throughout your course. In the
second section of this lecture, I talked you through a step-by-step method for
evaluating other peoples' arguments:

### Infallible Flowchart

I call the method the Infallible Flowchart because it always works. When
reading a paper (or textbook) have this flowchart beside you and go through its
steps for each key claim.

You start by identifying the conclusion of the argument. If you don't know what
it is that is being claimed, you cannot evaluate that claim. So, start with the
conclusion and work backwards.

Next, you identify the premise or premises. In other words, identify the
statements that are used to support the conclusion. These are called premises.

Next, you work out the relationship between the premise(s) and conclusion. For
example, if there are two premises, are they independent? In other words do
they each provide separate arguments for the conclusion? Or perhaps they are
conjoint? In other words, the argument assumes that both premises have to be
correct for the conclusion to follow. 

Next, you ask whether the premises support the conclusion. In other words, does
the conclusion follow from the reasons given? Is it a logical deduction? A
logical deduction is where the conclusion necessarily follows, given the truth
of the premise(s). Logical deduction is quite rare. Often, an inference is
being made. An inference is a conclusion that is likely to be true given the
truth of the premises, but not inevitably so.

Finally, you ask whether the premises are true. Even if the conclusion
logically follows from the premises, it is not a valid conclusion unless the
premises are true. In science, previous or current research is generally used
to evaluate whether the premises are true.

### AIDS example

We worked through an example of argument evaluation using an argument about
AIDS. We identified the conclusion and premises, and then decided that the
relationship between them was independent. The two premises provide two
different reasons why the authors wants us to believe his conclusion. If one
reason fails, the other may still support the conclusion.

We then came to the less formulaic part - do the premises support the
conclusion? This is quite difficult to say, and one of the reasons it's
difficult is because the conclusion is somewhat vague. What does the phrase
"not necessarily a death sentence" mean? Life is a death sentence - we all
die - and in the legally-related sense of the phrase, there is often a delay
of years or even decades between the announcement of a death sentence and it
being carried out. This makes it hard to see the first premise as supporting
the conclusion - the author would need to make a more specific conclusion in
order to use this premise appropriately.

The relationship of the second premise to the conclusion is somewhat
clearer. AIDS is a cause of death, being HIV+ is a symptom. If being HIV+ does
not necessarily lead to AIDS, it therefore does not necessarily lead to
death. This is fairly close to what the author seems to wish to conclude,
although again the conclusion could be clearer.

Finally, and crucially, we asked whether the premises were true. This
is the legwork of science, and its interconnectedness. Evaluation of
the truth of these premises depends on other arguments, in papers, and
on the soundness of those arguments.

The first premise is relatively straight forward and testable. One
well-cited study estimates mean incubation time of HIV to be 10 years
in young adults (Bacchetti & Moss, 1989) so, on first glance, the
premise seems not unreasonable.

In the second premise - "suggesting", "may" and "significant" are _hedges_. In
other words, they are terms which have the effect of reducing the clarity of
the premise without changing its essential character. If the second premise is
to support the conclusion, we have to consider it as the statement, "some
people who test positive for HIV never develop AIDS". Put this way, the premise
is hard to evaluate. There is one sense in which it is true - no test is
perfect, so some people who test positive for HIV are not, in fact, HIV+. But
this is unlikely to be what the author intended. If so, the statement is "some
people who are HIV+ never develop AIDS". Again, there is a fairly trivial sense
in which this is true. For example, someone who commits suicide on the news
they are HIV+ is never going to develop AIDS. As a matter of principle, then,
it is going to be very difficult to discount the possibility that AIDS would
have developed if the patient had not died of some other cause first.

What the author may be referring to is the presence of what the field
describes as "long-term non-progressors" - people who are still
asymptomatic after 12 years. Such cases do exist, and their prevalence
is hard to estimate, but they are certainly very rare, [one estimate is
1 in 500 cases of
HIV+](http://www.niaid.nih.gov/volunteer/hivlongterm/Pages/default.aspx).

In summary, the first premise seems to be supported by scientific
evidence, but the author's conclusion is too vague to be supported by
the first premise.  The second premise supports the conclusion, but it
is too vague to be clearly evaluated. If the author refers to
long-term non-progressors, then these do exist, but it seems too much
of a leap from an approximately 1 in 500 chance of not developing
symptoms for more than 12 years to "a significant number of people
who test positive never developing AIDS".


### Enthymemes (not in lecture)

The term _enthymeme_ refers to a situation, undesirable but quite common even
in scientific writing, where one or more of the premises are missing and have
to be inferred by the reader. For example, "It is biologically natural for
humans to eat animal flesh. Therefore, it is morally permissible for humans to
eat animal flesh". There's a missing premise here, "Whatever is biologically
natural for humans is morally permissible". It's important to
spot the missing premise (the _enthymeme_) because often it's quite weak. For
example, in this case there are some behaviours, like killing each other, that
we share with our oldest ancestors and closest primate relatives (yes, despite
the common misperception, we are not the only species that kills members of our
own species). Such behaviours have a reasonable claim to therefore be
"biologically natural" but presumably few would argue that they are "morally
permissible" (at least in most cases). 

Incidentally, note the connection between enthymemes and weak arguments. Use of
enthymemes is sometimes a form of weak argumentation, and one that could be
used to make an argument look stronger than it actually is.

### Using the flowchart in your writing

In the end, it all comes back to the flowchart. You should also see this as the
recipe for constructing good arguments. One of the most common problems in
student essays and reports is that one or more of these steps are missing in
the arguments presented. Most commonly, the conclusion is given, but the
premises are not. Or, if they are, the relationship between premise and
conclusion is not clarified. Or the truth of the premises is not examined.

## My-side bias (not in lecture)

It's also really important to be aware of the a common bias in argumentation -
my-side bias. This is a bias that people often do not realise they have, but
which reliably occurs unless they deliberately take steps to avoid it. I give
advice on how to avoid this bias in your own thinking.

One clear illustration of my-side bias comes from a study by Stanovich and West
(2006). The study shows that peoples' assessment of the strength of claims is
affected by the relation of those claims to their personal circumstances. Thus,
for example, non-drinkers are more likely than drinkers to think that drinking
at university leads to alcoholism later in life. 

Another example comes from a study by Vallone, Ross & Lepper (1985), concerning
the interpretation of news reports about the Lebanon War. Pro-Israeli students
considered the reports to be anti-Israel, but pro-Arab students considered the
reports to be pro-Israel. So, in this case, both sides considered the reports
to be biased towards the opposing side in the conflict. This is of course
impossible, and it's another example of my-side bias - the assessment of
evidence is affected by what you already believe.

A third study by Perkins et al. (1991) allows us to give some practical advice
on how to avoid my-side bias. Their study asked participants about issues of
social and political significance on which people typical already have a view,
although those views differ between individuals e.g. "Would providing more
money for state schools significantly improve the quality of teaching and
learning?". People were asked to give their considered opinion, along with
their reasons for that opinion. On average, people listed three my-side reasons
and one other-side reason.

So, again, we see my-side bias here - people seem to bias their argumentation
towards the side they already believe. The bad news from Perkin et al.'s study
was that my-side bias is not reduced by age, experience, or education level, of
the people evaluating the arguments. So, it doesn't matter how old or wise or
well educated you are, or how much practical experience you have of the topic
-- you still exhibit my-side bias.  However, the good news is that my-side bias
is reduced if you are specifically prompted to consider all aspects, to look
for arguments on both sides, and to evaluate objectively. This approach to
evaluating arguments is sometimes referred to as 'scaffolding', because it
involves putting in place a supporting structure that reminds you to look at
both sides of the argument fully. When scaffolded, people produced on average
six arguments on each side, eliminating my-side bias in their argumentation. 

So, to avoid my-side bias, scaffold yourself!


 ____

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International Licence.

Commit message:

Add link to fox hunting example.

docs/EvaluatingArgumentsInteractNotes.md, after:

# Evaluating arguments
_Andy J. Wills_

This lecture contained two sections, each aimed at improving your ability to
evaluate arguments - both your own, and other people's.  In the first part of
the lecture, I considered weak arguments - how to identify them and hence
avoid being taken in by them. In the second part, I demonstrated a systematic
method for evaluating arguments.

## Weak arguments

Weak arguments are those that do not support the arguer's conclusion (or do so
only very weakly). Weak arguments are prevalent in general society, and even in
science, because they have the _appearance_ of being good arguments. I'm
telling you about weak arguments so you can detect and reject them. Do not be
tempted by the _dark side_ of weak arguments! They are very powerful, as they
can often be used to win arguments without having to go to the bother of
considering the evidence.

Across several slides, I summarise some of the more common weak arguments. The
examples on the slides start light hearted and clear, but the later examples
indicate that serious issues are at stake here.

As an exercise, see if you can come up with your own examples of the
weak arguments discussed in the lectures. 

## How to evaluate an argument

Evaluating arguments is at the heart of all good scientific writing and is
central to doing well in all essays and reports throughout your course. In the
second section of this lecture, I talked you through a step-by-step method for
evaluating other peoples' arguments:

### Infallible Flowchart

I call the method the Infallible Flowchart because it always works. When
reading a paper (or textbook) have this flowchart beside you and go through its
steps for each key claim.

You start by identifying the conclusion of the argument. If you don't know what
it is that is being claimed, you cannot evaluate that claim. So, start with the
conclusion and work backwards.

Next, you identify the premise or premises. In other words, identify the
statements that are used to support the conclusion. These are called premises.

Next, you work out the relationship between the premise(s) and conclusion. For
example, if there are two premises, are they independent? In other words do
they each provide separate arguments for the conclusion? Or perhaps they are
conjoint? In other words, the argument assumes that both premises have to be
correct for the conclusion to follow. 

Next, you ask whether the premises support the conclusion. In other words, does
the conclusion follow from the reasons given? Is it a logical deduction? A
logical deduction is where the conclusion necessarily follows, given the truth
of the premise(s). Logical deduction is quite rare. Often, an inference is
being made. An inference is a conclusion that is likely to be true given the
truth of the premises, but not inevitably so.

Finally, you ask whether the premises are true. Even if the conclusion
logically follows from the premises, it is not a valid conclusion unless the
premises are true. In science, previous or current research is generally used
to evaluate whether the premises are true.

### AIDS example

We worked through an example of argument evaluation using an argument about
AIDS. We identified the conclusion and premises, and then decided that the
relationship between them was independent. The two premises provide two
different reasons why the authors wants us to believe his conclusion. If one
reason fails, the other may still support the conclusion.

We then came to the less formulaic part - do the premises support the
conclusion? This is quite difficult to say, and one of the reasons it's
difficult is because the conclusion is somewhat vague. What does the phrase
"not necessarily a death sentence" mean? Life is a death sentence - we all
die - and in the legally-related sense of the phrase, there is often a delay
of years or even decades between the announcement of a death sentence and it
being carried out. This makes it hard to see the first premise as supporting
the conclusion - the author would need to make a more specific conclusion in
order to use this premise appropriately.

The relationship of the second premise to the conclusion is somewhat
clearer. AIDS is a cause of death, being HIV+ is a symptom. If being HIV+ does
not necessarily lead to AIDS, it therefore does not necessarily lead to
death. This is fairly close to what the author seems to wish to conclude,
although again the conclusion could be clearer.

Finally, and crucially, we asked whether the premises were true. This
is the legwork of science, and its interconnectedness. Evaluation of
the truth of these premises depends on other arguments, in papers, and
on the soundness of those arguments.

The first premise is relatively straight forward and testable. One
well-cited study estimates mean incubation time of HIV to be 10 years
in young adults (Bacchetti & Moss, 1989) so, on first glance, the
premise seems not unreasonable.

In the second premise - "suggesting", "may" and "significant" are _hedges_. In
other words, they are terms which have the effect of reducing the clarity of
the premise without changing its essential character. If the second premise is
to support the conclusion, we have to consider it as the statement, "some
people who test positive for HIV never develop AIDS". Put this way, the premise
is hard to evaluate. There is one sense in which it is true - no test is
perfect, so some people who test positive for HIV are not, in fact, HIV+. But
this is unlikely to be what the author intended. If so, the statement is "some
people who are HIV+ never develop AIDS". Again, there is a fairly trivial sense
in which this is true. For example, someone who commits suicide on the news
they are HIV+ is never going to develop AIDS. As a matter of principle, then,
it is going to be very difficult to discount the possibility that AIDS would
have developed if the patient had not died of some other cause first.

What the author may be referring to is the presence of what the field
describes as "long-term non-progressors" - people who are still
asymptomatic after 12 years. Such cases do exist, and their prevalence
is hard to estimate, but they are certainly very rare, [one estimate is
1 in 500 cases of
HIV+](http://www.niaid.nih.gov/volunteer/hivlongterm/Pages/default.aspx).

In summary, the first premise seems to be supported by scientific
evidence, but the author's conclusion is too vague to be supported by
the first premise.  The second premise supports the conclusion, but it
is too vague to be clearly evaluated. If the author refers to
long-term non-progressors, then these do exist, but it seems too much
of a leap from an approximately 1 in 500 chance of not developing
symptoms for more than 12 years to "a significant number of people
who test positive never developing AIDS".

### Fox hunting example

A further example of argument evaluation was set as homework, one possible
answer can be read [here](fox-hunting.html).

### Enthymemes (not in lecture)

The term _enthymeme_ refers to a situation, undesirable but quite common even
in scientific writing, where one or more of the premises are missing and have
to be inferred by the reader. For example, "It is biologically natural for
humans to eat animal flesh. Therefore, it is morally permissible for humans to
eat animal flesh". There's a missing premise here, "Whatever is biologically
natural for humans is morally permissible". It's important to
spot the missing premise (the _enthymeme_) because often it's quite weak. For
example, in this case there are some behaviours, like killing each other, that
we share with our oldest ancestors and closest primate relatives (yes, despite
the common misperception, we are not the only species that kills members of our
own species). Such behaviours have a reasonable claim to therefore be
"biologically natural" but presumably few would argue that they are "morally
permissible" (at least in most cases). 

Incidentally, note the connection between enthymemes and weak arguments. Use of
enthymemes is sometimes a form of weak argumentation, and one that could be
used to make an argument look stronger than it actually is.

### Using the flowchart in your writing

In the end, it all comes back to the flowchart. You should also see this as the
recipe for constructing good arguments. One of the most common problems in
student essays and reports is that one or more of these steps are missing in
the arguments presented. Most commonly, the conclusion is given, but the
premises are not. Or, if they are, the relationship between premise and
conclusion is not clarified. Or the truth of the premises is not examined.

## My-side bias (not in lecture)

It's also really important to be aware of the a common bias in argumentation -
my-side bias. This is a bias that people often do not realise they have, but
which reliably occurs unless they deliberately take steps to avoid it. I give
advice on how to avoid this bias in your own thinking.

One clear illustration of my-side bias comes from a study by Stanovich and West
(2006). The study shows that peoples' assessment of the strength of claims is
affected by the relation of those claims to their personal circumstances. Thus,
for example, non-drinkers are more likely than drinkers to think that drinking
at university leads to alcoholism later in life. 

Another example comes from a study by Vallone, Ross & Lepper (1985), concerning
the interpretation of news reports about the Lebanon War. Pro-Israeli students
considered the reports to be anti-Israel, but pro-Arab students considered the
reports to be pro-Israel. So, in this case, both sides considered the reports
to be biased towards the opposing side in the conflict. This is of course
impossible, and it's another example of my-side bias - the assessment of
evidence is affected by what you already believe.

A third study by Perkins et al. (1991) allows us to give some practical advice
on how to avoid my-side bias. Their study asked participants about issues of
social and political significance on which people typical already have a view,
although those views differ between individuals e.g. "Would providing more
money for state schools significantly improve the quality of teaching and
learning?". People were asked to give their considered opinion, along with
their reasons for that opinion. On average, people listed three my-side reasons
and one other-side reason.

So, again, we see my-side bias here - people seem to bias their argumentation
towards the side they already believe. The bad news from Perkin et al.'s study
was that my-side bias is not reduced by age, experience, or education level, of
the people evaluating the arguments. So, it doesn't matter how old or wise or
well educated you are, or how much practical experience you have of the topic
-- you still exhibit my-side bias.  However, the good news is that my-side bias
is reduced if you are specifically prompted to consider all aspects, to look
for arguments on both sides, and to evaluate objectively. This approach to
evaluating arguments is sometimes referred to as 'scaffolding', because it
involves putting in place a supporting structure that reminds you to look at
both sides of the argument fully. When scaffolded, people produced on average
six arguments on each side, eliminating my-side bias in their argumentation. 

So, to avoid my-side bias, scaffold yourself!


 ____

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International Licence.
