### Fox hunting example

The students discussed a claim about fox hunting: "It is wrong to cause unnecessary
suffering to an animal. Fox hunting causes unnecessary suffering to the fox. It
is therefore wrong to hunt foxes.". Here's one analysis of that argument:

1. The conclusion is: "It is therefore wrong to hunt foxes".

2. The two premises are: (a) "It is wrong to cause unnecessary suffering to an
animal", and (b) "Fox hunting causes unnecessary suffering to the fox".

3. The relationship between the two premises and the conclusions is
_conjoint_. Both statements have to be correct for the conclusion to be
supported. If it was OK to cause unnecessary suffering, **or** if it were
untrue that fox hunting causes unnecessary suffering, then the conclusion would
not be supported.

4. Do the premises support the conclusion? Let's start by assuming the
conclusion is meant to be absolute - all fox hunting is wrong. Let's further
assume the premises are intended to be absolute - it is always wrong to cause
unnecessary suffering, and fox hunting always causes unnecessary suffering. If
all three are absolute, then it's a matter of logical deduction - the
conclusion follows necessarily from the premises. So, it the premises are true,
the conclusion is also true. However, if any one of the three statements (two
premises, one conclusion) are _contextual_ (e.g. "fox hunting sometimes causes
unnecessary suffering") then it gets more complex. In many cases, it will be an
inference rather than a deduction.

5. Are the premises true? The first premise is not really a scientific claim
because it is prescriptive rather than descriptive, as covered in
Lecture 1. The second premise is too vague to investigate, because of the term
"unnecessary". What defines whether an event is unnecessary? However, the
related claim "fox hunting causes suffering" is a claim for which the evidence
can potentially be examined scientifically --- if one were satisfied that
animal suffering is something that can be measured (which it probably is).
