docs/README.md, before:


## Critical Thinking

A set of lectures and workshops on the basics of thinking
critically, applied to the study of psychology as a science. 

- Science, truth, and honesty (_lecture, 2 hours_):
   [slides](ScienceTruthHonesty.pdf),
   [notes](ScienceTruthHonestyNotes.html).

- Evaluating experiments (_lecture, 2 hours_):
   [slides](EvaluatingExperiments.pdf),
   [notes](EvaluatingExperiments.html).

- Distributions and samples (_workshop, 1 hour_):
   [slides](distributions-samples.pdf),
   [instructor notes](distributions-samples.html)

- Regression to the mean, and illsusory correlation (_workshop, 1 hour_):
   [slides](regress-corr.pdf), 
   [shove ha'penny game](http://www.psy.plymouth.ac.uk/labplus/lp411ShoveHapenny/default.html), 
   [group behaviour statements](irr-corr.html), 
   [instructor notes](regress-corr.html)

- Evaluating arguments (_lecture, 2 hours_):
   [slides](EvaluatingArguments.pdf),
   [notes](EvaluatingArguments.html).

- Evaluating risk (_lecture, 2 hours_): [slides](EvaluatingRisk.pdf),
   [notes](EvaluatingRisk.html).

____

#### Source code

These teaching materials were generated using a combination of
Markdown and LaTeX. The full source code is available on
[github](https://github.com/ajwills72/critical-thinking).

___

#### Licence

This material is distributed under a [Creative
Commons](https://creativecommons.org/) licence. CC-BY-SA 4.0.

____

Commit message:

New version of data games, part 1

docs/README.md, after:


## Critical Thinking

A set of lectures and workshops on the basics of thinking
critically, applied to the study of psychology as a science. 

- Science, truth, and honesty (_lecture, 2 hours_):
   [slides](ScienceTruthHonesty.pdf),
   [notes](ScienceTruthHonestyNotes.html).

- Evaluating experiments (_lecture, 2 hours_):
   [slides](EvaluatingExperiments.pdf),
   [notes](EvaluatingExperiments.html).

- Evaluating arguments (_lecture, 2 hours_):
   [slides](EvaluatingArguments.pdf),
   [notes](EvaluatingArguments.html).

- Evaluating risk (_lecture, 2 hours_): [slides](EvaluatingRisk.pdf),
   [notes](EvaluatingRisk.html).


- Data games - COVID version (_workshop, 2 hours_):

    A single two-hour workshop that works for both socially-distanced in-person teaching, and Zoom-based teaching.
	
	[slides](data-games-slides.pdf)
	[instructor notes](data-games.html)


- Data games - Physical objects version (_two workshops, 1 hour each_):

    Two one-hour workshops, which require students to work in close proximity to each other.

    - Distributions and samples (_workshop 1_):
       [slides](distributions-samples.pdf),
       [instructor notes](distributions-samples.html)

    - Regression to the mean, and illusory correlation (_workshop 2_):
       [slides](regress-corr.pdf), 
       [shove ha'penny game](http://www.psy.plymouth.ac.uk/labplus/lp411ShoveHapenny/default.html), 
       [group behaviour statements](irr-corr.html), 
       [instructor notes](regress-corr.html)

____

#### Source code

These teaching materials were generated using a combination of
Markdown and LaTeX. The full source code is available on
[github](https://github.com/ajwills72/critical-thinking).

___

#### Licence

This material is distributed under a [Creative
Commons](https://creativecommons.org/) licence. CC-BY-SA 4.0.

____
